Val-2f (#244)
idaholab/TMAP8: doc/content/verification_and_validation/val-2f.md

Reviewer: The structure of the documentation should be reorganized. 
Moving the figure with T history up to the second point would make the documentation flow better.

# val-2f

# Modelling self-damaged tungsten effects on deuterium transport

## Test Description

> The case under study involves the use of recrystallized polycrystalline tungsten (PCW) samples, which are subjected to ion irradiation and subsequent analysis using thermal desorption spectroscopy (TDS). The primary objective is to determine how damage influences deuterium trapping and release. This case is drawn from [!cite](dark2024modelling).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The case being used for validation here involves the use of recrystallized polycrystalline tungsten (PCW) samples, which are subjected to ion irradiation and subsequent analysis using thermal desorption spectroscopy (TDS). The primary objective is to determine how damage influences deuterium trapping and release. This case is drawn from [!cite](dark2024modelling).
```

> The case under study involves the use of recrystallized polycrystalline tungsten (PCW) samples, which are subjected to ion irradiation and subsequent analysis using thermal desorption spectroscopy (TDS). The primary objective is to determine how damage influences deuterium trapping and release. This case is drawn from [!cite](dark2024modelling).

Reviewer: There should be an original experimental paper you should be able to cite here.

The TDS process is simulated using TMAP8 in a 1D tungsten sample with a thickness of 0.8 mm. The TDS simulation consisted of three phases: implantation, resting, and desorption.

During the charging phase, deuterium is continuously implanted into the tungsten sample over a period of 72 hours. The temperature is maintained at 370 K throughout this phase. The surface is exposed to a constant flux of $\phi=5.79\times 10^{19}$ atoms/m$^2$/s, corresponding to a total fluence of $1.5\times 10^{25}$ atoms/m$^2$. The implantation profile follows a Gaussian distribution centered at the mean implantation depth of $R_p=0.7$ nm, with a standard deviation of $\sigma = 0.5$ nm :

\begin{equation}
    S(x) = \frac{1}{\sigma \sqrt{2\pi}} \exp\left( -\frac{(x - R_p)^2}{2\sigma^2} \right) \cdot \phi_{\text{surface}}(t)
\end{equation}

where the surface flux function is given by:

\begin{equation}
    \phi_{\text{surface}}(t) =
    \begin{cases}
        \phi, & t < 72 h \\
        0, & \text{otherwise}
    \end{cases}
\end{equation}

> The implantation distribution is illustrated in [val-2f_implantation_distribution]. It highlights the need for mesh refinement on the order of $\sigma$ in the implantation region to accurately resolve the profile and capture the sharp gradient of the source term.

Reviewer: What does `n the order of $\sigma$` mean? Please clarify. Maybe also explain why you plotted Rp+5sigma on the figure. Otherwise it is there without context.

!media comparison_val-2f.py
    image_name=val-2f_implantation_distribution.png
    style=width:50%;margin-bottom:2%;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto
    id=val-2f_implantation_distribution
    caption=Deuterium implantation.

After the implantation phase, the system enters the cooldown phase, lasting 12 hours. During this period, the sample temperature is rapidly reduced from 370 K to 295 K. No additional deuterium is introduced during this phase, meaning the source term is set to zero.

The final stage of the simulation is the desorption phase, during which the sample is gradually heated from 300 K to 1000 K at a constant rate of $\beta = 0.05$ K/s.

The general form of the governing diffusion equation for the deuterium concentration $C(x,t)$ in tungsten is given by:

\begin{equation}
    \frac{\partial C}{\partial t} = \nabla \cdot \left( D \nabla C \right) + S(x, t)
\end{equation}

The diffusion coefficient $D(T)$ follows an Arrhenius-type dependency on temperature:

\begin{equation}
    D(T) = D_0 \exp\left(-\frac{E_D}{k_B T}\right)
\end{equation}

> On the left boundary, deuterium recombines into gas. Assuming the recombination process is at steady state, it can be described by the following surface flux:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the surfaces, deuterium recombines into gas. It can be described by the following surface flux:
```

\begin{equation}
    J = 2 A K_r C^2
\end{equation}

> where $J$ represents the recombination flux out of the left sample side, $A$ is the area that side, and $K_r$ is the deuterium recombination coefficient. The coefficient of 2 accounts for the fact that 2 deuterium atoms combine to form one D$_2$ molecule. The flux out of the right sample side is assumed to be zero.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where $J$ represents the recombination flux out of the left sample side, $A$ is the area that side, and $K_r$ is the deuterium recombination coefficient. The coefficient of 2 accounts for the fact that 2 deuterium atoms combine to form one D$_2$ molecule.
```
Both surfaces should be treated the same here. Moreover, the concentration was fixed to 0, not the flux.

> The emission rate of deuterium from the sample was recorded as a function of temperature to assess how deuterium diffused and was released from the material. In that way, the emission rate from the sample could be measured as a function of temperature. The sample temperature histories are shown in [val-2f_temperature_pressure_history].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The emission rate of deuterium from the sample is recorded as a function of temperature to assess how deuterium diffuses and is releases from the material. In that way, the emission rate from the sample is measured as a function of temperature. The sample temperature histories are shown in [val-2f_temperature_pressure_history].
```

!media comparison_val-2f.py
    image_name=val-2f_temperature_history.png
    style=width:50%;margin-bottom:2%;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto
    id=val-2f_temperature_pressure_history

>     caption=Pressure and temperature histories.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    caption=Temperature history.
```

| $R_p$     | Mean implantation depth              | 0.7                                                         | nm                    | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $\sigma$  | Standard deviation of implantation profile | 0.5                                                   | nm                    | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $\Phi$    | Incident fluence                     | 1.5 $\times 10^{25}$                                        | atoms/m$^2$           | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $\phi$    | Incident flux                        | 5.79 $\times 10^{19}$                                       | atoms/m$^2$/s         | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $l_W$     | Length of the tungsten sample        | 0.8                                                         | mm                    | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $K_r$     | Deuterium recombination coefficient  | $3.8\times 10^{-26} \exp\left(\frac{0.34 (\text{eV})}{k_b \cdot T}\right)$ | m$^4$/at/s | [!cite](zhao2020deuterium) |

## Results

!media comparison_val-2f.py
       image_name=val-2f_comparison.png
       style=width:50%;margin-bottom:2%;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto
       id=val-2f_comparison

>        caption=Comparison of TMAP8 calculations with experimental data on deuterium flux (atoms/m$^2$/s). The experimental data are provided by T. Schwarz-Selinger and are available at https://zenodo.org/records/11085134.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       caption=Comparison of TMAP8 calculations with experimental data on deuterium flux (atoms/m$^2$/s). The experimental data are provided by T. Schwarz-Selinger and are available [here](https://zenodo.org/records/11085134).
```

!media comparison_val-2f.py
       image_name=val-2f_comparison.png
       style=width:50%;margin-bottom:2%;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto
       id=val-2f_comparison
       caption=Comparison of TMAP8 calculations with experimental data on deuterium flux (atoms/m$^2$/s) for a damage of 0.1 dpa.

[val-2f_deuterium_desorption] displays the quantities of mobile and escaping deuterium atoms during the desorption process. As desorption occurs, no further implantation takes place, resulting in a decrease in the number of mobile deuterium atoms and an increase in the number of escaping deuterium atoms. Mass conservation is well maintained during desorption, with only a 0.05% error between the initial number of mobile deuterium atoms and the combined total of mobile and escaping deuterium atoms.

> !media comparison_val-2f.py

Reviewer 2: For the green box, is 'mass conservation' or 'total amount' appropriate labesl, instead of 'mobile+escaping deuterium'?

> !media comparison_val-2f.py

Reviewer 2: or rather 'escaping deuterium'?

> !media comparison_val-2f.py

Reviewer: 'desorbed deuteriun' would be best. No need for a commit just for that, just go ahead and start adding trapping sites and update this simultaneously.

> !media comparison_val-2f.py

Reviewer: As also noted elsewhere, let's use the term desorbed rather than escaping, which is not commonly used in the field.

| $\phi$    | Incident flux                        | 5.79 $\times 10^{19}$                                       | atoms/m$^2$/s         | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $l_W$     | Length of the tungsten sample        | 0.8                                                         | mm                    | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $K_r$     | Deuterium recombination coefficient  | 3.8$\times 10^{-26} \exp\left(\frac{0.34 (\text{eV})}{k_b \cdot T}\right)$ | m$^4$/at/s | [!cite](zhao2020deuterium) |
| $n_t$     | Tungten density                      | 6.3222 $\times 10^{28 }$                                    | at/m$^3$              | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |

All the traps parameters are listed in [val-2f_traps_values]. The trapping and de-trapping rates (atoms/s) are $\nu_{\mathrm{t},i} = \nu_\mathrm{\mathrm{t},0}\cdot\exp(-E_{\mathrm{t},i}/(k_{\textrm B}\cdot T))$ and $\nu_{\mathrm{dt},i} = \nu_{\mathrm{dt},0}\cdot\exp(-E_{\mathrm{dt},i}/(k_{\textrm B}\cdot T))$ respectively. The trapping energy $E_{\mathrm{t},i}$ is equal to the diffusion activation energy $E_D$, and the trapping pre-factor $\nu_{\mathrm{t},i}$ is equal to the diffusion pre-factor $D_0$.

> !table id=val-2f_traps_values caption=Values of traps parameters for 0.1 dpa.

Author: What do you mean by that bc I included [val-2f_set_up_values] to mention table 2?

> !table id=val-2f_traps_values caption=Values of traps parameters for 0.1 dpa.

Reviewer: I think that was a comment I left before you added this line. It's good now.

| $E_{\mathrm{dt},2}$ | Trap 2 de-trapping energy     | 1.35                                                        | eV                    | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $n_2$ | Trap 2 density                             | 3.8$\times 10^{25}$                                         | atoms/m$^3$           | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |

## Results

[val-2f_comparison] shows the comparison of the TMAP8 calculation and the experimental data during desorption. The experimental data are provided by T. Schwarz-Selinger and are available [here](https://zenodo.org/records/11085134). The distinctive shape of the TMAP8 curve arises from the detrapping energies of trap 1 and trap 2. By including additional traps in the simulations, the TMAP8 results are expected to better align with the experimental data.

!media comparison_val-2f.py
       image_name=val-2f_comparison.png
       style=width:50%;margin-bottom:2%;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto
       id=val-2f_comparison
       caption=Comparison of TMAP8 calculations with experimental data on deuterium flux (atoms/m$^2$/s) for a damage of 0.1 dpa.

> [val-2f_deuterium_desorption] displays the quantities of mobile, trapped, and escaping deuterium atoms during the desorption process. During desorption, the temperature increases from 300K to 1000K. The amount of deuterium trapped will decrease as the temperature rises and the various trapping energies are reached. Trap 1 will release deuterium before trap 2, as its trapping energy is smaller.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[val-2f_deuterium_desorption] displays the quantities of mobile, trapped (in trap 1 and trap 2), and desorbing deuterium atoms during the desorption process. During desorption, the temperature increases from 300 K to 1000 K. The amount of deuterium trapped will decrease as the temperature rises and the various trapping energies are reached, meaning that deuterium will leave the traps, become mobile, and diffuse out. Trap 1 will release deuterium before trap 2, as its trapping energy is lower.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> During desorption, no further implantation occurs, resulting in a decrease in the number of mobile and trapped deuterium atoms and an increase in the number of escaping deuterium atoms. Mass conservation is well maintained during desorption, with only a 0.02% error between the initial number of mobile and trapped deuterium atoms and the total number of deuterium atoms (mobile, trapped and escaping).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During desorption, no further implantation occurs, resulting in a decrease in the number of mobile and trapped deuterium atoms and an increase in the number of desorbed deuterium atoms. Mass conservation is well maintained during desorption, with only a 0.02% root mean squared percentage error (RMSPE) between the initial number of mobile and trapped deuterium atoms and the total number of deuterium atoms (mobile, trapped, and desorbed).
```

!media comparison_val-2f.py

>        image_name=val-2f_deuterium_desorption.png

Reviewer: It seems like you are missing the mobile deuterium, and the legend needs to be fixed for it too.

| $D_0$     | Diffusion pre-factor                 | 1.6 $\times 10^{-7}$                                | m$^2$/s               | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $E_D$     | Activation energy for deuterium diffusion      | 0.28                                              | eV                    | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $R_p$     | Mean implantation depth              | 0.7                                                         | nm                    | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $\sigma$  | Standard deviation of implantation profile | 0.5                                                   | nm                    | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $\Phi$    | Incident fluence                     | 1.5 $\times 10^{25}$                                        | atoms/m$^2$           | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $\phi$    | Incident flux                        | 5.79 $\times 10^{19}$                                       | atoms/m$^2$/s         | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $l_W$     | Length of the tungsten sample        | 0.8                                                         | mm                    | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |

> | $K_r$     | Deuterium recombination coefficient  | 3.8$\times 10^{-26} \exp\left(\frac{0.34 (\text{eV})}{k_b \cdot T}\right)$ | m$^4$/at/s | [!cite](zhao2020deuterium) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| $K_r$     | Deuterium recombination coefficient  | 3.8$\times 10^{-26} \exp\left(-\frac{0.34 (\text{eV})}{k_b \cdot T}\right)$ | m$^4$/at/s | [!cite](zhao2020deuterium) |
```

> | $K_r$     | Deuterium recombination coefficient  | 3.8$\times 10^{-26} \exp\left(\frac{0.34 (\text{eV})}{k_b \cdot T}\right)$ | m$^4$/at/s | [!cite](zhao2020deuterium) |

Reviewer: Please add a warning in the documentation stating that there is a typo in the original reference [!cite](zhao2020deuterium) and that we use the corrected value.

| $\epsilon_r^4$ | Release energy for trap 4     | 1.85                                                        | eV                    | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $\epsilon_r^5$ | Release energy for trap 5     | 2.05                                                        | eV                    | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $\epsilon_r^6$ | Release energy for intrinsic trap     | 1.04                                                        | eV                    | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $N_1$ | Density for trap 1                          | 4.8$\times 10^{25}$                                         | atoms/m$^3$           | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $N_2$ | Density for trap 2                             | 3.8$\times 10^{25}$                                         | atoms/m$^3$           | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $N_3$ | Density for trap 3                             | 2.6$\times 10^{25}$                                         | atoms/m$^3$           | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $N_4$ | Density for trap 4                             | 3.6$\times 10^{25}$                                         | atoms/m$^3$           | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |

> | $N_5$ | Density for trap 5                             | 1.1$\times 10^{25}$                                         | atoms/m$^3$           | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |

Reviewer: Be explicit about how you calculate the trap density based on the equation from the original paper Dark et al.

| $N_6$ | Density for intrinsic trap                             | 2.4$\times 10^{22}$                                         | atoms/m$^3$           | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |

> 

Reviewer: You need to add a paragraph here about the different values of recombination paramaters that you use, why you use different ones, and how you picked these values. You should also describe what is done in the original paper from Dark et al.

## Results

[val-2f_comparison] shows the comparison of the TMAP8 calculation and the experimental data during desorption. The experimental data are provided by T. Schwarz-Selinger and are available [here](https://zenodo.org/records/11085134).

!media comparison_val-2f.py
       image_name=val-2f_comparison.png
       style=width:50%;margin-bottom:2%;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto
       id=val-2f_comparison
       caption=Comparison of TMAP8 calculations with experimental data on deuterium flux (atoms/m$^2$/s) for a damage of 0.1 dpa and a normal recombination rate.

> [val-2f_deuterium_desorption] displays the quantities of mobile, trapped, and desorbing deuterium atoms during the desorption process. During desorption, the temperature increases from 300 K to 1000 K. The amount of deuterium trapped will decrease as the temperature rises and the various trapping energies are reached, meaning that deuterium will leave the traps, become mobile, and diffuse out. During desorption, no further implantation occurs, resulting in a decrease in the number of mobile and trapped deuterium atoms and an increase in the number of desorbed deuterium atoms. Mass conservation is well maintained during desorption, with only a 0.02% root mean squared percentage error (RMSPE) between the initial number of mobile and trapped deuterium atoms and the total number of deuterium atoms (mobile, trapped, and desorbed).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[val-2f_deuterium_desorption] displays the quantities of mobile, trapped, and desorbing deuterium atoms during the desorption process. During desorption, the temperature increases from 300 K to 1000 K. The amount of deuterium trapped will decrease as the temperature rises and the various trapping energies are reached, meaning that deuterium will leave the traps, become mobile, and diffuse out. During desorption, no further implantation occurs, resulting in a decrease in the number of mobile and trapped deuterium atoms and an increase in the number of desorbed deuterium atoms. Mass conservation is well maintained during desorption, with only a 0.01% root mean squared percentage error (RMSPE) between the initial number of mobile and trapped deuterium atoms and the total number of deuterium atoms (mobile, trapped, and desorbed).
```

!media comparison_val-2f.py

>        image_name=val-2f_deuterium_desorption.png

Reviewer: Please do as we discussed and organize the legend in the same order as the data. This is currently reversed. 

Also, the color gradient is not varied anough and it's hard to know what is what. Use a different color scheme. 
This comment is valid for the other figures below.

The analytical solution for the ODE is given by:

\begin{equation}
    \label{eq:trapping_sites_density_sol}
    N_i(t) = \frac{\Phi K_c}{\frac{\Phi K_c}{N_{\text{max}, \Phi}} + A} \left[ 1 - \exp\left(-\left(\frac{\Phi K_c}{N_{\text{max}, \Phi}} + A\right)t\right) \right]
\end{equation}

The computed trap densities are provided in [val-2f_traps_values].

### • Deuterium transport equations

The general form of the transport equations for the deuterium in tungsten is given by:

\begin{equation}
    \label{eq:diffusion}
    \frac{\partial C_M}{\partial t} = \nabla D \nabla C_M + S + \text{trap\_per\_free} \cdot \sum_{i=1}^{2} \frac{\partial C_{T_i}}{\partial t}
\end{equation}

> and, for $i=1$ and $i=2$:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and, for $i \in [1,6]$ representing the trapping sites:
```

\begin{equation}
    \label{eq:trapped_rate}
    \frac{\partial C_{T_i}}{\partial t} = \alpha_t^i  \frac {C_{T_i}^{empty} C_M } {(N \cdot \text{trap\_per\_free})} - \alpha_r^i C_{T_i}
\end{equation}

and

\begin{equation}

>     C_{T_i}^{empty} = (C_{{T_i}0} \cdot N - \text{trap\_per\_free} \cdot C_{T_i})

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    C_{T_i}^{empty} = C_{{T_i}0} \cdot N - \text{trap\_per\_free} \cdot C_{T_i}
```

\begin{equation} \label{eq:diffusivity}
D = D_{0} \exp \left( - \frac{E_{D}}{k_b T} \right)
\end{equation}

where $E_{D}$ is the diffusion activation energy, $T$ is the temperature, and $D_{0}$ is the maximum diffusivity coefficient.

$\alpha_t^i$ and $\alpha_r^i$ are defined as:

\begin{equation} \label{eq:trapping}
\alpha_t^i = \alpha_{t0}^i \exp(-\epsilon_t^i / T)
\end{equation}

and

\begin{equation} \label{eq:release}
\alpha_r^i = \alpha_{r0}^i \exp(-\epsilon_r^i / T)
\end{equation}

where $\alpha_{t0}^i$ and $\alpha_{r0}^i$ are the pre-exponential factors of trapping and release. The trapping energy $\epsilon_t^i$ is equal to the diffusion activation energy $E_D$.

### • Boundary conditions

> At the surfaces, deuterium recombines into gas. It can be described by the following surface flux:
> 
> \begin{equation}
>     J = 2 A K_r C^2
> \end{equation}
> 
> where $J$ represents the recombination flux exiting the sample on both the left and right sides, $A$ is the surface area, and $K_r$ is the deuterium recombination coefficient. The coefficient of 2 accounts for the fact that 2 deuterium atoms combine to form one D$_2$ molecule. This boundary condition is used in [val-2f_comparison].
> 
> Additionally, to account for an infinite recombination rate at the boundaries, a Dirichlet boundary condition can be enforced, setting $C_M = 0$ atoms/m$^3$ on the left and right sides.
> This boundary condition is used in [val-2f_comparison_inf_recombination].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are several ways to model the surface behavior of deuterium, and this study tested two options. One can assume that every deuterium atom at the surface is immediately desorbed from the materials, effectively assuming an infinite recombination rate at the surface and imposing a null Dirichlet boundary condition for the mobile deuterium concentration ($C_M = 0$ atoms/m$^3$). This is the assumption used in [!cite](dark2024modelling)  and reproduced in [val-2f_comparison_inf_recombination]. 

However, it is also possible to capture the rate of deuterium recombination at the surface
as it recombines into gas. It can be described by the following surface flux:

\begin{equation}
    J = 2 A K_r C^2
\end{equation}

where $J$ represents the recombination flux exiting the sample on both the left and right sides, $A$ is the surface area, and $K_r$ is the deuterium recombination coefficient. The coefficient of 2 accounts for the fact that 2 deuterium atoms combine to form one D$_2$ molecule. Using this condition, the surface concentration will not be imposed, but be governed by the concentration of deuterium coming to the surface from the bulk and the rate of recombination. This boundary condition is used in [val-2f_comparison].
```

As described in the boundary conditions section, the recombination rate can be set to a finite value. Initially, the recombination rate from [!cite](zhao2020deuterium) can be used. Subsequently, as detailed in the results section below, the recombination rate is increased. In [!cite](dark2024modelling), the recombination rate is infinite. The values used are listed in [val-2f_recombination_rates]:

!table id=val-2f_recombination_rates caption=Values of recombination rates.
| Parameter | Description                                    | Value                       | Units         | Reference                  |
| --------- | ---------------------------------------------- | --------------------------- | ------------- | -------------------------- |
| $K_r$     | Small deuterium recombination coefficient      | 3.8$\times 10^{-26} \exp\left(-\frac{0.34 (\text{eV})}{k_b \cdot T}\right)$ | m$^4$/at/s | [!cite](zhao2020deuterium) |
| $K$       | Normal deuterium recombination coefficient     | 3.8$\times 10^{-16} \exp\left(-\frac{0.34 (\text{eV})}{k_b \cdot T}\right)$ | m$^4$/at/s | - |

!alert warning title=Typo in formula from [!cite](zhao2020deuterium)

> There is a typo in the expression for the deuterium recombination coefficient for clean tungsten surfaces from [!cite](zhao2020deuterium) where the minus sign in the exponential is missing, even though the data shows it should be present. Consequently, we used the corrected value in our simulations, which includes the minus sign.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

In this section provides the model parameters for this validation case. [val-2f_set_up_values] provides the base model parameters for the validation case. Then, we presents two sets of parameter values for the trapping sites. First, in [val-2f_damaged_induced_traps], we lists the parameters related to the damage-induced traps. These parameters capture the irradiation-dependent evolution of trap properties. Second, in val-2f_traps_values, we reproduce the calibrated values used in [!cite](dark2024modelling) to reproduce the desorption data. As illustrated in [val-2f_trap_induced_density], the trap densities in these two approaches, i.e., analytical solution in [eq:trapping_sites_density_sol] and calibrated values in [val-2f_trap_induced_density], differ. 

!table id=val-2f_set_up_values caption=Values of material properties.
| Parameter | Description                                    | Value                       | Units         | Reference                  |
| --------- | ---------------------------------------------- | --------------------------- | ------------- | -------------------------- |
| $k_B$     | Boltzmann constant                             | 1.380649 $\times 10^{-23}$  | J/K           | [PhysicalConstants.h](https://physics.nist.gov/cgi-bin/cuu/Value?r) |
| $T_{\text{initial}}$ | Initial temperature                 | 370                         | K             | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $T_{\text{cooldown}}$ | Cooldown temperature               | 295                         | K             | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $T_{\text{desorption,min}}$ | Desorption start temperature | 300                         | K             | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $T_{\text{desorption,max}}$ | Desorption end temperature   | 1000                        | K             | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $\beta$   | Desorption heating rate                        | 0.05                        | K/s           | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $t_{\text{charge}}$ | Charging time                        | 72                          | h             | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $t_{\text{cooldown}}$ | Cooldown duration                  | 12                          | h             | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $D_0$     | Diffusion pre-factor                           | 1.6 $\times 10^{-7}$        | m$^2$/s       | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $E_D$     | Activation energy for deuterium diffusion      | 0.28                        | eV            | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $R_p$     | Mean implantation depth                        | 0.7                         | nm            | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $\sigma$  | Standard deviation of implantation profile     | 0.5                         | nm            | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $\Phi_D$  | Incident fluence                               | 1.5 $\times 10^{25}$        | atoms/m$^2$   | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $\phi_D$  | Incident flux                                  | 5.79 $\times 10^{19}$       | atoms/m$^2$/s | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $l_W$     | Length of the tungsten sample                  | 0.8                         | mm            | [!cite](dark2024modelling) |
| $N$       | Tungten density                                | 6.3222 $\times 10^{28 }$    | at/m$^3$      | [J-Dark-PhD](https://zenodo.org/records/11085134) |

!table id=val-2f_damaged_induced_traps caption=Damaged-induced traps parameters from [!cite](dark2024modelling) used in [eq:trapping_sites_density] to capture the evolution of trap properties with irradiation.
| Trap   | $\Phi$ (dpa/s)       | $K_c$ (traps/m$^3$/dpa) | $N_{\text{max,}\Phi}$ (atoms/m$^3$) | $A_0$ (1/s)              | $E_A$ (eV) | $T$ (K)|
| ------ | -------------------- | ----------------------- | ----------------------------------- | ------------------------ | ---------- | ------ |
| Trap 1 | 8.9 $\times 10^{-5}$ | 9.0 $\times 10^{26}$    | 6.9 $\times 10^{25}$                | 6.18 $\times 10^{-3}$    | 0.24       | 800    |
| Trap 2 | 8.9 $\times 10^{-5}$ | 4.2 $\times 10^{26}$    | 7.0 $\times 10^{25}$                | 6.18 $\times 10^{-3}$    | 0.24       | 800    |
| Trap 3 | 8.9 $\times 10^{-5}$ | 2.5 $\times 10^{26}$    | 6.0 $\times 10^{25}$                | 6.18 $\times 10^{-3}$    | 0.30       | 800    |
| Trap 4 | 8.9 $\times 10^{-5}$ | 5.0 $\times 10^{26}$    | 4.7 $\times 10^{25}$                | 6.18 $\times 10^{-3}$    | 0.30       | 800    |
| Trap 5 | 8.9 $\times 10^{-5}$ | 1.0 $\times 10^{26}$    | 2.0 $\times 10^{25}$                | 0                        | -          | 800    |

!table id=val-2f_traps_values caption=Calibrated values of traps parameters for 0.1 dpa from [!cite](dark2024modelling) to match the experimental desorption data.
| Parameter       | Description                             | Value                | Units       | Reference                                         |
| --------------- | --------------------------------------- | -------------------- | ----------- | ------------------------------------------------- |
| $\alpha_{t0}^i$ | Pre-factor of trapping rate coefficient | $\frac{D_0}{6 \cdot (1.1\times 10^{-10})^2}$ | atoms/s | [J-Dark-PhD](https://zenodo.org/records/11085134) |
| $\alpha_{r0}^i$ | Pre-factor of release rate coefficient  | $10^{13}$            | atoms/s     | [J-Dark-PhD](https://zenodo.org/records/11085134) |
| $\epsilon_t^i$  | Trapping energy for all traps           | 0.28                 | eV          | [!cite](dark2024modelling)                        |
| $\epsilon_r^1$  | Release energy for trap 1               | 1.15                 | eV          | [!cite](dark2024modelling)                        |
| $\epsilon_r^2$  | Release energy for trap 2               | 1.35                 | eV          | [!cite](dark2024modelling)                        |
| $\epsilon_r^3$  | Release energy for trap 3               | 1.65                 | eV          | [!cite](dark2024modelling)                        |
| $\epsilon_r^4$  | Release energy for trap 4               | 1.85                 | eV          | [!cite](dark2024modelling)                        |
| $\epsilon_r^5$  | Release energy for trap 5               | 2.05                 | eV          | [!cite](dark2024modelling)                        |
| $\epsilon_r^6$  | Release energy for intrinsic trap       | 1.04                 | eV          | [!cite](dark2024modelling)                        |
| $N_1$           | Density for trap 1                      | 4.63$\times 10^{25}$ | atoms/m$^3$ | [eq:trapping_sites_density_sol]                   |
| $N_2$           | Density for trap 2                      | 2.87$\times 10^{25}$ | atoms/m$^3$ | [eq:trapping_sites_density_sol]                   |
| $N_3$           | Density for trap 3                      | 1.96$\times 10^{25}$ | atoms/m$^3$ | [eq:trapping_sites_density_sol]                   |
| $N_4$           | Density for trap 4                      | 2.97$\times 10^{25}$ | atoms/m$^3$ | [eq:trapping_sites_density_sol]                   |
| $N_5$           | Density for trap 5                      | 7.87$\times 10^{24}$ | atoms/m$^3$ | [eq:trapping_sites_density_sol]                   |
| $N_6$           | Density for intrinsic trap              | 2.4$\times 10^{22}$  | atoms/m$^3$ | [!cite](dark2024modelling)                        |

!media comparison_val-2f.py
simopier marked this conversation as resolved.
simopier marked this conversation as resolved.
       image_name=val-2f_trap_induced_density.png
       style=width:50%;margin-bottom:2%;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto
       id=val-2f_trap_induced_density
       caption=Trap densities as a function of damage. The analytical solutions are represented by the solid curve, while the points indicate the fitted values used in [!cite](dark2024modelling) at 0.1 dpa.

As described in the boundary conditions section, we use two different approaches for the description of the surface recombination rates. We first impose $C_M = 0$ atoms/m$^3$ to reproduce the results from [!cite](dark2024modelling). However, we also capture the finite kinetics of surface reaction using the recombination rate from [!cite](zhao2020deuterium), which has been increased in this study to better match the TDS data. The values used are listed in [val-2f_recombination_rates]:

!table id=val-2f_recombination_rates caption=Values of recombination rates.
| Parameter | Description                                    | Value                       | Units         | Reference                  |
| --------- | ---------------------------------------------- | --------------------------- | ------------- | -------------------------- |
| $K_r$     | Deuterium recombination coefficient      | 3.8$\times 10^{-26} \exp\left(-\frac{0.34 (\text{eV})}{k_b \cdot T}\right)$ | m$^4$/at/s | [!cite](zhao2020deuterium) |
| $K$       | Adapted deuterium recombination coefficient     | 3.8$\times 10^{-16} \exp\left(-\frac{0.34 (\text{eV})}{k_b \cdot T}\right)$ | m$^4$/at/s | - |

!alert warning title=Typo in formula from [!cite](zhao2020deuterium)
There is a typo in the expression for the deuterium recombination coefficient for clean tungsten surfaces from [!cite](zhao2020deuterium) where the minus sign in the exponential is missing, even though the data shows it should be present. Consequently, we used the corrected value in our simulations, which includes the minus sign.
```

> 

Reviewer: In the figure showing the trapping densities, please use colors for the dots so that readers can see what dot corresponds to what trap.

## Results

The figures below show the comparison of the TMAP8 calculation and the experimental data during desorption. The experimental data are provided by T. Schwarz-Selinger and are available [here](https://zenodo.org/records/11085134).

> [!cite](dark2024modelling) assumed an infinite recombination rate. This rate can be modeled in TMAP8 using the boundary conditions described above. The trap densities used in this paper have been fitted and differ from the analytical solution in [eq:trapping_sites_density_sol]. The values used at 0.1 dpa are shown in [val-2f_trap_induced_density] and are compared to the analytical solution.
> 
> !media comparison_val-2f.py
>        image_name=val-2f_trap_induced_density.png
>        style=width:50%;margin-bottom:2%;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto
>        id=val-2f_trap_induced_density
>        caption=Trap densities as a function of damage. The analytical solutions are represented by the solid curve, while the points indicate the fitted values used in [!cite](dark2024modelling) at 0.1 dpa.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> [val-2f_deuterium_desorption_inf_recombination] displays the quantities of mobile, trapped, and desorbing deuterium atoms during the desorption process. During desorption, the temperature increases from 300 K to 1000 K. The amount of deuterium trapped will decrease as the temperature rises and the various trapping energies are reached, meaning that deuterium will leave the traps, become mobile, and diffuse out. During desorption, no further implantation occurs, resulting in a decrease in the number of mobile and trapped deuterium atoms and an increase in the number of desorbed deuterium atoms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We first reproduce the results from [!cite](dark2024modelling) using a Dirichlet boundary condition at the surface and using the calibrated trapping properties from al-2f_traps_values. [val-2f_deuterium_desorption_inf_recombination] displays the quantities of mobile, trapped, and desorbing deuterium atoms during the desorption process. During desorption, the temperature increases from 300 K to 1000 K. The amount of deuterium trapped will decrease as the temperature rises and the various trapping energies are reached, meaning that deuterium will leave the traps, become mobile, and diffuse out. During desorption, no further implantation occurs, resulting in a decrease in the number of mobile and trapped deuterium atoms and an increase in the number of desorbed deuterium atoms.
```

Mass conservation in [val-2f_deuterium_desorption_inf_recombination] is maintained during desorption, with a 0.01% root mean squared percentage error (RMSPE) between the initial number of mobile and trapped deuterium atoms and the total number of deuterium atoms (mobile, trapped, and desorbed).

> [val-2f_comparison_inf_recombination] shows a good alignment with the experimental data. With an infinite recombination rate, the amount of mobile deuterium is minimal compared to the trapped deuterium, as demonstrated in [val-2f_deuterium_desorption_inf_recombination]. Consequently, the desorbed deuterium flux is solely due to the deuterium desorbing from the traps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[val-2f_comparison_inf_recombination] shows a good alignment with the experimental data and the results presented in [!cite](dark2024modelling). With an infinite recombination rate, the amount of mobile deuterium is minimal compared to the trapped deuterium, as demonstrated in [val-2f_deuterium_desorption_inf_recombination]. Consequently, the desorbed deuterium flux is almost solely due to the deuterium desorbing from the traps.
```

!media comparison_val-2f.py
       image_name=val-2f_deuterium_desorption_inf_recombination.png
       style=width:50%;margin-bottom:2%;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto

>        id=val-2f_deuterium_desorption_inf_recombination

Reviewer: Please increase the legend size for this figure and the other similar one, the text is not easily readable.

>        caption=Quantity of deuterium atoms during the desorption process for an infinite recombination rate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       caption=Quantity of deuterium atoms during the desorption process for an infinite recombination rate and calibrated trapping properties.
```

!media comparison_val-2f.py
       image_name=val-2f_comparison_inf_recombination.png
       style=width:50%;margin-bottom:2%;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto
       id=val-2f_comparison_inf_recombination

>        caption=Comparison of TMAP8 calculations with experimental data on deuterium flux (atoms/m$^2$/s) for a damage of 0.1 dpa and an infinite recombination rate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       caption=Comparison of TMAP8 calculations with experimental data on deuterium flux (atoms/m$^2$/s) for a damage of 0.1 dpa and an infinite recombination rate and calibrated trapping properties.
```

> In this validation case, the recombination rate has been set to a finite value to better reflect real conditions. Specifically, the recombination rate is set to a value 10 orders of magnitude higher than that reported by [!cite](zhao2020deuterium). A recombination rate that is too low leads to the accumulation of a significant amount of mobile deuterium at the onset of the desorption phase. Consequently, this would result in desorption being attributed to mobile deuterium rather than trapped deuterium.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this validation case, the recombination rate has been set to a finite value to better reflect real conditions. Specifically, the recombination rate is set to a value 10 orders of magnitude higher than that reported by [!cite](zhao2020deuterium). A recombination rate that is too low leads to the accumulation of a significant amount of mobile deuterium at the onset of the desorption phase. Consequently, this would result in desorption being attributed to mobile deuterium rather than trapped deuterium. The updated, increased recombination rate limits deuterium accumulation in the sample, without imposing a surface concentration. 
```

> As shown in [val-2f_deuterium_desorption], the quantity of mobile deuterium is nearly equal to zero, similar to the case with an infinite recombination rate, and mass conservation is maintained. The TMAP8 results in [val-2f_comparison] match well with the experimental data. There still exists an offset between the TMAP8 results and the experimental data, which can be reduced by better fitting the trap parameters described in [val-2f_traps_values].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As shown in [val-2f_deuterium_desorption], the quantity of mobile deuterium is nearly equal to zero, similar to the case with an infinite recombination rate, and mass conservation is maintained. The TMAP8 results in [val-2f_comparison] match well with the experimental data. There still exists an offset between the TMAP8 results and the experimental data, which can be reduced by better fitting the recombination rate and trapping parameters described in [val-2f_traps_values] using the [MOOSE's stochastic tools module](https://mooseframework.inl.gov/modules/stochastic_tools/index.html).
```

It is important to mention here that the mesh for the infinite recombination rate requires a finer mesh as well as smaller time steps compared to the finite recombination rate case.

!media comparison_val-2f.py
       image_name=val-2f_deuterium_desorption.png
       style=width:50%;margin-bottom:2%;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto
       id=val-2f_deuterium_desorption

>        caption=Quantity of deuterium atoms during the desorption process for a normal recombination rate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       caption=Quantity of deuterium atoms during the desorption process for an adapted recombination rate and uncalibrated trapping properties.
```

!media comparison_val-2f.py
       image_name=val-2f_comparison.png
       style=width:50%;margin-bottom:2%;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto
       id=val-2f_comparison

>        caption=Comparison of TMAP8 calculations with experimental data on deuterium flux (atoms/m$^2$/s) for a damage of 0.1 dpa and a normal recombination rate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       caption=Comparison of TMAP8 calculations with experimental data on deuterium flux (atoms/m$^2$/s) for a damage of 0.1 dpa and an adapted recombination rate and uncalibrated trapping properties.
```

!media comparison_val-2f.py
    image_name=val-2f_temperature_pressure_history.png
    style=width:50%;margin-bottom:2%;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto
    id=val-2f_temperature_pressure_history
    caption=Pressure and temperature histories.

!table id=val-2f_parameters caption=Model parameter values for the charging and the desorption phases [!citep](longhurst1992verification,ambrosek2008verification). $T$ is the temperature in Kelvin.
| Property of deuterium | Value for charging phase              | Value for desorption phase            | Units               |
| --------------------- | ------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------- | ------------------- |
| Diffusivity in Be     | $8.0 \times 10^{-9} \exp(-4220/T)$    | $8.0 \times 10^{-9} \exp(-4220/T)$    | m$^2$/s             |
| Solubility in Be      | $7.156 \times 10^{27} \exp(-11606/T)$ | $7.156 \times 10^{27} \exp(-11606/T)$ | at/m$^3$/Pa$^{1/2}$ |

> | Solubility in BeO     | $5.00 \times 10^{20} \exp(9377.7/T)$  | $5.00 \times 10^{20} \exp(9377.7/T)$  | at/m$^3$/Pa$^{1/2}$ |

Reviewer: Please edit/update this to be representative of the new validation case. Even if the case is not finalized, we want to have the full documentation of the case, and then we'll just update the results. So please describe the case, describe the irradiation/absorption/desorption history, describe the model being used to model it, and list the parameter values.  and add the new references needed for this case.

## Results

[val-2f_comparison] shows deuterium flux (atoms/m$^2$/s) as a function of temperature (K), obtained using the TMAP8 model. The curve shows a sharp peak around 350 K, where the deuterium flux reaches its maximum, slightly above 3.0 × 10$^23$ atoms/m$^2$/s. After this peak, the flux rapidly decreases as the temperature increases, following an exponential-like decay. Around 500 K, the flux becomes relatively low, with a small secondary feature near 600 K, before continuing its decline towards near-zero values beyond 700 K. This behavior suggests that deuterium desorption from the material is temperature-dependent, with a strong release occurring at lower temperatures (near 350 K), followed by a much weaker release at higher temperatures.

> !media comparison_val-2f.py

Reviewer: Please add the experimental data (taken from the original paper) to this plot. 
The fit will not be great at first since the simulation does not account for everything, but we'll get to see the evolution towards a better fit as you add new features.

# val-2f

> # Modelling neutron damage effects on tritium transport in tungsten

Author: At first, their goal is to determine the trap creation parameters, $K$ and $n_{max,\phi}$. To do this, they use experimental results from T. Schwarz-Selinger, who studied self-damaged tungsten samples that were later exposed to deuterium. These results are then analyzed using Thermal Desorption Spectroscopy (TDS).

Once they have the trap creation parameters, they move on to a different study, this time looking at how damage-induced traps affect tungsten’s tritium retention. However, they don’t have experimental data for this part.

Since my model is based on the first study, I should indeed consider renaming it to better reflect what it's actually about.

## Test Description

> The case under study involves the use of recrystallized polycrystalline tungsten (PCW) samples, which are subjected to ion irradiation and subsequent analysis using thermal desorption spectroscopy (TDS). The primary objective is to determine how damage influences deuterium trapping and release.

Author: Yes, I'll do that. The experimental data comes from unpublished work by T. Schwarz-Selinger and is stored in a Zenodo file: https://zenodo.org/records/11085134.

The TDS process is simulated using TMAP8 in a 1D tungsten sample with a thickness of 0.8 mm. The TDS simulation consisted of three phases: implantation, resting, and desorption.

During the charging phase, deuterium is continuously implanted into the tungsten sample over a period of 72 hours. The temperature is maintained at 370 K throughout this phase. The surface is exposed to a constant flux of $\phi=5.79\times 10^{19}$ atoms/m $^2$/s, corresponding to a total fluence of $1.5\times 10^{25}$ atoms/m $^2$. The implantation profile follows a Gaussian distribution centered at the mean implantation depth of $R_p=0.7$ nm, with a standard deviation of $\sigma = 0.5$ nm :

\begin{equation}

>     S(x) = \frac{1}{\sigma \sqrt{2\pi}} \exp\left( -\frac{(x - R_p)^2}{2\sigma^2} \right) \cdot \phi_{\text{surface}}(t)

Reviewer: How did you select this function? I do not see it in the original paper.

Author: On page 5, the function is determined as follows:

"For the implantation phase, the source term in equation (1) is $S = \Gamma \cdot f(x)$, where $\Gamma$ is the implanted ion flux in $\text{m}^{-2} \cdot \text{s}^{-1}$ and $f(x)$ is a Gaussian distribution with $R_p$ as its mean value and $\sigma\$ its width."

## Governing equations

The general form of the transport equations for the deuterium in tungsten is given by:

\begin{equation}
    \label{eq:diffusion}
    \frac{\partial C_M}{\partial t} = \nabla D \nabla C_M + S + \text{trap\_per\_free} \cdot \sum_{i=1}^{2} \frac{\partial C_{T_i}}{\partial t}
\end{equation}

and, for $i=1$ and $i=2$:

\begin{equation}
    \label{eq:trapped_rate}
    \frac{\partial C_{T_i}}{\partial t} = \alpha_t^i  \frac {C_{T_i}^{empty} C_M } {(N \cdot \text{trap\_per\_free})} - \alpha_r^i C_{T_i}
\end{equation}

and

\begin{equation}

>     C_{T_i}^{empty} = (C_{{T_i}0} \cdot N - \text{trap\_per\_free} \cdot C_{T_i})

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    C_{T_i}^{empty} = (C_{T_i,0} \cdot N - \text{trap\_per\_free} \cdot C_{T_i})
```

\end{equation}

> where $C_M$ is the concentration of mobile tritium, $t$ is the time, $S$ is the source term in sample due to the deuterium implantation ([eq:source_term]), $C_{T_i}$ is the trapped species in trap $i$, $\alpha_t^i$ and $\alpha_r^i$ are the trapping and release rate coefficients for trap $i$, $\text{trap\_per\_free}$ is a factor scaling $C_{T_i}$ to be closer to $C$ for better numerical convergence, $C_{{T_i}0}$ is the fraction of host sites $i$ that can contribute to trapping, $C_{T_i}^{empty}$ is the concentration of empty trapping sites, and $N$ is the host density, and $D$ is the tritium diffusivity in tungsten, which is defined as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where $C_M$ is the concentration of mobile tritium, $t$ is the time, $S$ is the source term in the sample due to the deuterium implantation (see [eq:source_term]), $C_{T_i}$ is the concentration of trapped species in trap $i$, $\alpha_t^i$ and $\alpha_r^i$ are the trapping and release rate coefficients for trap $i$, $\text{trap\_per\_free}$ is a factor scaling $C_{T_i}$ to be closer to $C_M$ for better numerical convergence, $C_{T_i,0}$ is the fraction of host sites $i$ that can contribute to trapping, $C_{T_i}^{empty}$ is the concentration of empty trapping sites, and $N$ is the host density, and $D$ is the tritium diffusivity in tungsten, which is defined as:
```
